Adds ExDoc cheatsheet blog post (#1665)
elixir-lang/elixir-lang.github.com: _posts/2022-12-22-cheatsheets-and-8-other-features-in-exdoc-that-improve-the-developer-experience.markdown

---
layout: post

> title: "Cheatsheets and 8 other features in ExDoc that improve the developer experience"

Reviewer: Thoughts as a title?

```suggestion
title: "Cheatsheets and other 8 ExDoc features that improve the developer experience"
```

author: Hugo Baraúna

> category: Internals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
category: Announcements
```

> excerpt: This post explains the motivation behind the new ExDoc Cheatsheet feature. It also highlights other ExDoc features that show how it has been evolving to make the documentation experience in Elixir better and better.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: This post explains the motivation behind the new ExDoc Cheatsheet feature. It also highlights other ExDoc features that show how ExDoc has been evolving to make the documentation experience in Elixir better and better.
```

---

> ExDoc has a cool new feature, [Cheatsheets](https://hexdocs.pm/ex_doc/cheatsheet.html)!

Reviewer: Nitpick: I think we should not capitalize cheatsheets? If so, we should do a find and replace across the post 😉 

```suggestion
ExDoc has a cool new feature, [cheatsheets](https://hexdocs.pm/ex_doc/cheatsheet.html)!
```

In this blog post, we'll explain what that new feature is and the motivation behind it. We'll also take the opportunity to highlight other ExDoc features that show how it has been evolving to make the documentation experience in Elixir better and better.

> ## What is ExDoc Cheatsheet and how it improves documentation experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What are ExDoc Cheatsheets and how they improve the documentation experience
```

> ExDoc's Cheatsheets are Markdown files with the  `.cheatmd` extension. One can use it to write cheatsheets for their Elixir projects. Here's an [example of how the Ecto project is using](https://hexdocs.pm/ecto/crud.html) them.

Reviewer: Nits:

```suggestion
ExDoc's Cheatsheets are Markdown files with the  `.cheatmd` extension. You can see [an example](https://hexdocs.pm/ecto/crud.html) of how the Ecto project is using them.
```

Writing and reading cheatsheets is not exactly new to developers. What ExDoc brings to the table is the possibility of integrating cheatsheets alongside the rest of the documentation of an Elixir project, instead of hosting it in a different place.

Developers need different kinds of docs at different times. When one is learning about a new library, a guide format is proper. When one needs to know if a library can solve a specific problem, an API reference can be more appropriate. When someone wants to remember a couple of functions they already used from that library, a cheatsheet could be more practical.

> Imagine if you had to go to a different place for every type of documentation you're looking for. That would make a very fragmented experience. And not only for readers of documentation but also for writers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine if you had to go to a different place for every type of documentation you're looking for. That would make a very fragmented experience, not only for readers of documentation but also for writers.
```

> ExDoc Cheatsheet represents one step further in the direction of making documentation in Elixir an even more comprehensive and integrated experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ExDoc Cheatsheets represent one step further in the direction of making documentation in Elixir an even more comprehensive and integrated experience.
```

ExDoc Cheatsheets are inspired by [devhints.io](https://devhints.io) from [Rico Sta. Cruz](https://twitter.com/rstacruz), and were contributed by [Paulo Valim](https://twitter.com/paulovalim) and [Yordis Prieto](https://twitter.com/alchemist_ubi).

> ## 8 features that show how ExDoc has improved developer experience over time

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Eight features that show how ExDoc has improved developer experience over time

```

Here are some of the features added to ExDoc over the years that make reading and writing documentation in Elixir a joy.

### Beautiful and usable design
As developers, we may not have the skill to make beautifully designed UIs. That doesn't mean we don't appreciate it.

Here's what ExDoc-based documentation looked like almost ten years ago, with its original layout based on [YARD](https://yardoc.org/).

![](https://i.imgur.com/O9xKjR8.jpg)

Here's what it looks like today:

![](https://i.imgur.com/ZKI1T23.png)

The evolution of ExDoc's design helped ExDoc-based documentation be more visually appealing and easier to read and navigate.

### Links to source code

Sometimes you're reading the docs of a library, and you want to know more about the implementation of a function. Or you found something in the documentation that could be improved and wants to help.

In those situations, it's helpful to go from the documentation to the source code. ExDoc makes that dead easy.

For every module, function, or page, ExDoc gives you a link that you can click to go directly to the project's source code inside Github:

![](https://i.imgur.com/PXvoeDk.gif)

### Guides

> One of the most common formats of library documentation is an API reference. But depending on your need, that's not the most approachable doc format. For example, when you're just getting started with a library, or when you want to learn how to solve a specific problem using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the most common formats of library documentation is an API reference. But depending on your needs, that's not the most approachable format. For example,it's not optimal when you're just getting started with a library or when you want to learn how to solve a specific problem using it.
```
